The Joe Rogan experience. So actually there's a set of books that,
that let lay this out perfectly. You read,
dosyeskis wrote a book called the possessed or the devils, and it's a,
it's a description of the initial breakdown of the,
of Orthodox Christian society in, in Russia,
in the late 18 hundreds and the rise of radical soul socialist ideas. So it's,
it's sort of like the prodroma to the Russian revolution. It's a brilliant,
brilliant book, brilliant book,
and it concentrates on the personalities that are involved.
And then if you read after that, sojani and goag arch,
capelago where he details. What he did does in that book is quite remarkable.
So he says, look,
there were tens of millions of people killed from 1919 to 1959 in the Soviet
union. And as a consequence of internal repression.
And it's so dreadful, that words can't do it justice. I mean,
it's absolutely dreadful what happened in the Soviet union. I mean,
just for starters,
6 million Ukrainians died in the 1930s because of enforced starvation. In fact,
in, in, in the 1930s, here's, here's how, here's how terrible it was.
So all the food that the collective farmers,
newly collectiveized farmers had produced, which wasn't very much by the way,
was taken from them and brought to the cities.
So all the farmers starvveed to death now, here's, here's how draconian it got.
So let's say you were the mother of some children and all your grain had been
shipped off to the cities and you thought, well,
I'm not gonna have my children's starve to death.
I'm gonna be go out in the field and I'm gonna on my hands and knees.
And I'm gonna pick up the grains that are left over that the harvesters didn't
count get, and I'm going to feed those to my kids that was punishable by death.
You were supposed to hand in those extra bits of grain so that they could be
shipped to the city as well.
So that was just the beginning of the fund in the Soviet union.
And what soldier knitson did was say, look,
this wasn't a consequence of the Marxist system gone wrong.
This was a consequence of the Marxist system.
It was inevitable consequence of the axioms of the marxis system.
And then he lays that out and, and, and it's, I think he got it right.
And what is that connection? Why the Nobel prize, but what is the connection?
It, the,
how much tyranny you have to impose in order to produce something like equality
of outcome. The, the, and Thomas soells talked about this a little bit too.
He said what the people who are agitating for equality of outcome don't
understand is that you have to need so much power to the authorities,
to the government in order to ensure equality of outcome,
that a tyranny is inevitable and that's right.
And the other prob another problem with equality of outcome.
This is also a big technical problem is like, well, what measure of outcome?
You know, there's lots of outcomes. Like how happy are you? How much pain win?
How healthy are you? How much money do you have?
How much opportunity for movement forward, do you have?
What's the width of your social connections?
Like what's the quality of your friendships?
Do you have exposure to art and literature? Like, you know,
you can multiply the number of dimensions of evaluation between people
ennuerably right, because there's, there's all sorts of ways to classify people.
You're gonna get equality of outcome on every one of those measures
is like everyone going to have to be equally happy in their relationship.
And if not, why not? Why, why stop with economic E why stop up with pay.
There's no place to stop. So, and that's,
and that's a huge technical problem because there is no place to stop.
There will be no stopping. It's like, nobody can have anything else.
Nobody can have anything that everyone else doesn't have at the same time.
That's the ultimate outcome of equality of outcome. Well,
you think about what that would mean. It terrible. Well instantly you think, oh,
well there's nothing, but a tyrannical system could impose that.
Have you ever debated.
A Marxist supporter?
Have you ever debated someone who is pro-equality of outcome?
No, they don't debate me. Well, the only,
the closest thing I think was to that was the debate I did at the university of
Toronto about the bill C 16 issues, but they didn't actually have a debate.
They had a forum, which is the post-modern equivalent of a debate.
It's supposed to be friendlier, I suppose. Um, but no, uh,
I haven't because people don't do it. They don't ask me to do it. But what is.
It about that idea or that ideology about Marxism?
That's so attractive to young students and,
and to university.
Professors. Oh, that's a good question.
I think it goes back to the issue of inequality and,
and this is something that has to be dead seriously addressed. It's like,
you might say, well, why is the left wing necessary? Let let's,
let's put it that way. And so, and then a subset of that would be, well,
why is the left wing attractive? Well,
the left wing is necessary because inequality does spiral out of control.
And so there has to be a political voice for the dispossessed. And you,
you don't want people to stack up at zero, you know,
where they can't play the game at all. It's a bad idea. Not only do you, not,
if people stack up at zero, they're too poor to get ahead at all.
Let's say they're too poor to open a bank account.
They're too poor to buy enough food.
Like they're stuck at zero and they can't get out of it.
It's a really bad scene because first of all,
that's a lot of suffering and that's not so good. Second of all,
well, at least in principle, a lot of those people might be, um,
what might have something to offer the world or their children might,
and you want to open up avenues of opportunity to them so that they can succeed,
but so that everyone else can benefit from success. So,
and then the next thing is, well, if the inequality gets outta hand too much,
then the whole society starts to destabilize.
Because if you get enough people stacked up at zero, especially young men,
you get enough young men stacked up at zero, they think, oh, to hell with it.
We'll just flip the whole board over and it'll settle in a new configuration.
And maybe we won't be stuck at zero in of configuration.
So it fo revolutionary thinking.
So there's lots of reasons to be concerned about inequality.
And so you need a voice on the left to say, look, we gotta parameterize the,
the tendency towards inequality so that it doesn't,
detabilize the entire society. So that it's,
everybody has an opportunity to advance. Like, yes. Right. You need that.
Okay. So that's the technical reason for the necessity of the left.
And then I think it's attractive because, well,
because young people can be resentful,
partly cuz they're at the bottom of the heap, so to speak.
They're not cuz they're young. Like, look, you want to be,
you wanna be in 18, you wanna be rich in 80,
which you gonna choose most people's gonna take poor at 18. Well, yeah.
<laugh> especially if you've been rich at 80 and you understand you can get back
there. Yeah. Well that's the thing, you know,
is that most of the people who are have a million dollars or more in the
United States are old. Well, why is that? Well, I really do.
We need an explanation for that.
It's like you've had a lot more time to make money. How would that be?
That's the explanation.
So that's one of the big drivers of inequequality is just simply age,
but it's not obvious that the old rich people have an advantage over the young
starting out people. So, so anyways, but any anyhow,
maybe you're resentful and your cuz you're young and you're still at the bottom
of the heap and you know, you've got other problems too.
It's more difficult for people of your race or ethnicity or gender,
at least you think it is. And so you say, well, I wanna make things fair.
And then that's also driven by some real compassion because nobody really likes
that the consequences of radical inequality,
like nobody likes the fact that homeless people exist and have to go to the
emergency ward, you know,
to get treated and they don't have medical coverage and they have to live
intense on the street. And so if you have some compassion, then you think, well,
we gotta do more for the poor and dispossessed. It's like, okay, that's,
that's an understandable sentiment. But the problem is is that the people,
but the miss is that it's, that, that,
that desire to help is contaminated by resentment and ideological certainty.
And then also by something that George Orwell pointed out so nicely in his book
road to wig and pier, it's like the typical middle class socialist.
This was his diagnosis. And he was a socialist by the way,
his diagnosis was the typical, a gold middle class, intellectual socialist.
Doesn't like the poor. In fact,
they don't have anything to do with the poor they're contemptuous of the poor,
but they hate the rich.
And I think it's even more devious than that because I think who they hate are
the successful, some of the successful or rich,
but really who they hate is the successful it's it's like key can enable it's
thetelling of cane enable.
And so there's some positive motivations for being engaged on the left.
And there's a lot of negative motivations as well.
And the people who are really driven by the radical left ideology,
the real radicals, they're almost all driven by, by resentment and hatred.
As far as I'm concerned. Now,
the let let's look at both extra.
So back to the idea of the,
of the ideological and verbal territory, I said with bill C 16,
that I wouldn't speak the language of the radical leftist,
because I don't think that that language should define the game,
but let's say it does. So here's the game.
The world is a battleground of groups and the they're battling for power.
That's it that's the game.
And some of them win and they oppress those who don't win.
So that's how we're gonna view the world. Okay. Now the left is say, okay,
well here's the oppressed people, the oppressors,
the patriarchy P article types.
They should be ashamed of themselves and give up some power and the right
wingers, the radical right. Wingers, look at that. And they say, oh, I see.
So the game is ethnic identity. Is it? It's it's identity politics. Okay.
We're white males. We're not gonna lose.
That's the right wing version of identity politics. It's like, screw you.
If we're, we're gonna divide into groups.
If we're gonna divide into tribes and I'm in my tribe,
I'm not gonna get all guilty and lose. I'm gonna get all cruel and win.
And that's like, then you think, well, there's people in the middle.
They're kind of looking back and forth.
Which side of the identity politics spectrum. I might get a fallen.
Do I want to go with the, do I want to go,
do I wanna be driven primarily by compassion?
And am I going to accept guilt for my historical privilege?
So that's one possibility. And then I'm the oppressor,
I'm the member of the oppressor group? Or am I gonna say, oh no,
to hell with that, I'm just gonna play to win.
Well then I'm gonna go to the right. It's like, well,
my sense is how about we don't play either of those games?
And the reason we shouldn't play them is, well,
the Soviets played the left wing game and like killed.
Who knows how many tens of millions of people. You can't even count.
It accurately. The estimates range from 20 to a hundred million,
those are pretty big error bars. And the,
and the Moists may be a hundred million, certainly 60 million. So, okay.
That didn't work out so well. And then there's the Nazis.
Like they played ethnic identity politics and racial superiority. It's like,
what do we, we wanna play that game. See what I've been trying to do. Really?
What I've been trying to do for the last 30 years is say, look,
there's heavy temptations to play those sorts of games,
but that's not the only game in town. It's much game to play individual.
It's like, get your act together, stand up in the world,
make something of yourself, stay away from the ideological.
Oversimplifications set your house in order. That's rule six in the, in the,
in this book. So I have a book rule in there,
says set your house in perfect order before you criticize the world.
And it's a very dark chapter about the motivations of the Columbine high
school killers. And this other guy named Carl panram,
who was a serial rapist and arsonist and murderer. And these,
he wrote an autobiography and the Columbine kids also wrote about why they did
what they did. They're resentful to the core, bitter, bitter, resentful,
terrible and
well I'm suggesting that people will stay away from that resentment,
resentfulness and bitterness, even though life is hard and it, and it,
and there's malevolence in the world. It's like, yeah, you can,
you can tell a story where everyone's a victim because we all die.
We all get sick, you know? And, and,
and things happen to us that are bitter and terrible betrayal.
Deceit lies. Like people heard us on purpose, you know?
So it's not just the tragedy of life. It's malevolence as well. It's,
everyone's a victim. You can tell that story. The problem is,
if you tell that story and you start to act it out, you make all of that worse.
That's the problem. And it's,
so this is why partly I got attracted to Christian imagery, at least in part.
Um,
cuz there's an idea in Christianity that you should pick up your cross and like
walk up the hill and that's dramatically.
That's correct. That's the right answer. It's like,
you've got a heavy load of suffering to bear and a fair bit of it's gonna be
unjust. So what are you gonna do about it?
Accept it voluntarily and try to transform as a consequence.
That's the right answer. It's the right answer.
Cuz the rest of it is tribalism and we're we're too technologically powerful to
get all tribal again.
I.